Hear the word of the Lord.
Now when John heard in prison about the deeds of the Christ, he sent word by his disciples and said to him, are you the one who is to come?
Or shall we look for another?
And Jesus answered them, go and tell John what you hear and see.
The blind received their sight and the lame walk, lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear and the dead are raised up and the poor have good news preached to them.
and blessed is the one who is not offended by me.
As they went away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds concerning John.
What did you go out into the wilderness to see?
A reed shaken by the wind?
What then did you go out to see?
A man dressed in soft clothing?
Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in King's houses.
What then did you go out to see?
A prophet.
Yes, I tell you in more than a prophet, this is he of whom it is written, behold, I send my messenger before your face who will prepare your way before you.
Truly, I say to you, among those born of women, there has arisen no one greater than John the Baptist, yet the one who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, and the violence take it by force.
For all the prophets in the law prophesied until John.
And if you are willing to accept it, he has Elijah who is to come.
He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
But to what shall I compare this generation?
It is like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling to their playmates.
We played the flute for you and you did not dance.
We sang a dirge and you did not mourn.
For John came neither eating nor drinking and they say he has a demon.
The son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, look at him, a glutton, and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners, yet wisdom is justified by her deeds.
The grass weathers and the flowers fade, but the word of our God will stand forever, and you may be seated, friends.
Please join me in prayer.
Blessed and merciful Father, as we now turn our attention to the preaching of your word, we ask that you would meet us here, that your spirit would be present, that you would take these words and make them alive, that you would do what no preacher can do and what no hero can do, that you would speak through your word this morning.
All glory be to you, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
One God now and forever.
Amen.
When I became a teacher, I expected to be asked a lot of questions.
That's part of being a teacher.
There's one question though that I was not
expected that I would be asked.
With anywhere near the regularity that I am asked it, at least once a semester in every single class I teach, one of my students raises their hand and says, Mr. Kemple, do you have a favorite student?
I always answer it the same way.
I'm sorry, Oliver.
No.
No, I don't have a favorite student.
I do, however, have a favorite kind of student, a favorite type of student.
See, I love
teaching a student who doubts.
I love teaching students who doubt, and if you've ever seen any movie where the main character is a teacher, you get what I'm talking about.
I love teaching a student who's skeptical, who's paying close enough attention to things that they have to question what's going on.
A student that says, Mr. Kemple, do you really care for me?
Does Homer really in any way can communicate virtue that will make me a better person?
Is this writing assignment really going to be beneficial?
Does God really hear our prayers?
Did Christ really come incarnate on earth?
Is there even really a God up there at all?
Are my thoughts worthy of attention?
Do I have value apart from what I contribute and output?
Students who doubt.
is my favorite type of student to have in my class because they're engaged.
They're bought in, they're asking questions.
My guess is, though I don't know all of you, there are probably some of you here this morning who are wrestling with these same doubts.
I met with a student recently and it started in a pretty typical way as far as meeting with students go.
The student asked me the question, Mr. Kemple, how do I know if I'm a Christian or not?
How can I know if I'm saved?
And so we had a conversation and I gave them assurances and we talked about what scripture said.
And then afterwards I asked them, what would make you feel comfortable that you were saved?
What measure, what mark would you need to see in your life that would result in assurance?
The student's answer was, if God spoke to me.
If I heard him audibly say to me, you are a Christian, then I could rest sure that I believe.
See friends, that's moved beyond doubt.
Doubt says, I don't know what's real or not.
We move beyond doubt to demand when we start to say, if you don't do this, God, then you are not really God.
If you don't do this, then I,
cannot and will not believe in you.
That is exactly what we encounter in our text this morning.
What we see in our text is that Jesus comforts those who doubt but confronts those who demand.
Jesus comforts those who doubt but confronts those who demand.
And we'll see this in two different movements.
The first one, Jesus comforts those who doubt.
The second one,
Jesus confronts those who demand.
Not very original this morning, I'm sorry, but hopefully it's easy to follow at least.
We're gonna begin with our, with our first point, Jesus comforts those who doubt, but we do have sub points to this one.
I'm sorry, I snuck in a third point really.
So Jesus comforts those who doubt first by giving evidence.
Jesus comforts those who doubt by giving evidence.
Now when John heard in prison about the deeds of the Christ,
He sent word by his disciples and said to him, are you the one who is to come or shall we look for another?
If the pause here and unpack this, I know we're just getting started in the story, but we haven't been preaching Matthew up until this point.
And so we need to have context for what's going on, like which John is this?
What prison are we talking about?
What do they mean look for another?
So this John here is John the Baptist.
Jesus' cousin, he's been arrested by Herod, and so he is now in a Jewish prison cell functionally, but really, really like a puppet type ruler for Rome.
He was arrested because they didn't like the things that he was saying, especially the whole repent part because that means you're doing something wrong.
So they arrested him, they've thrown him in jail,
and he sends his disciples to Jesus and says, are you the Messiah?
Should we keep on looking?
Friends, this is an absolutely bizarre question to come from John the Baptist.
Do you remember who John the Baptist is?
He's the one that when he was still in utero and the Virgin Mary with Christ approached
His mother Elizabeth, he left in her womb for joy because the Messiah approached him.
He's the one who baptized the Christ, heard the Father declare from heaven, this is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, saw the Holy Spirit descend as a dove, who upon seeing the Christ says, behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.
That's who John is.
but he's wrestling with doubt.
And we have to ask, why on earth is John wrestling with doubt?
If this is who John is, how could he possibly have any doubt?
What do you mean look for another?
Well, it's because John is in a prison cell.
And just like every other Jewish person living at that time, their understanding of the Messiah's coming was that he would violently overthrow the Roman oppressors
And then they would rule with him as their king, replacing David, the mighty warrior, who's ruling over the nations.
And boy, John's life does not look like that.
Every time he wakes up, he's still in a prison cell.
And in fact, he will not leave that prison cell.
He will live nowhere else.
He will be beheaded and die there.
So as much as we like to sweep the idea of doubt away, we have to acknowledge this is reasonable.
This is a reasonable question to be asking, and I have to ask you friends, where do you have doubt in your life because of unmet expectations?
What conclusions did you come to life with or at this point in your life with saying, God's definitely going to do these things.
He's going to give me this thing.
Certainly, I'll have this from God.
And now you don't.
And so you doubt.
It's perfectly reasonable.
But do what John the Baptist did.
Go to Jesus with those doubts.
Don't let them harden to the point of demands and look and see how Jesus answers here as he gives evidence to John.
And Jesus answered them, verse four, go and tell John what you hear and see.
The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them.
And blessed is the one who is not offended by me."
This is a strange list in some ways.
The beginning has all the things that you would expect for the coming of the Messiah.
Deaf people are hearing, blind people are seeing, lame people are walking, lepers are being healed, the dead are raised to life,
Of course, yes.
And the government is overthrown and we are ruled by our good king forever and ever, right?
It's not what Jesus says.
In fact, the end of the list, what everything is building to, and the poor have good news preached to them.
That's what this is all culminating in.
The good news that Christ is declaring, to put it in English,
the gospel, the good news.
That's what this all culminates in.
And then Jesus says something that's very reminiscent of the Beatitudes.
And blessed is the one who is not offended by me.
And don't think of offended in the way that we use that term politically now in our modern day.
Think offended like the one who will not receive me, who will not take me in.
Jesus is saying blessed is the one
who doesn't reject me because of their expectations.
Because I have an overthrown Rome, because I'm here to preach good news to the poor, blessed is the one who receives me, who is not offended by me, who does not reject me.
John got an answer surprisingly, but it really shouldn't be that surprising, friends.
This is what God does.
When we go to God with genuine questions, genuine wrestling, we should not be surprised that God answers us, lovingly and mercifully answers us.
I think so often we're afraid to admit doubts as if somehow us wrestling with doubts makes God less real.
But friends, God is real enough that He can handle your doubts.
So when you wrestle without go to God, pray to Him.
Lord, I believe, help my unbelief.
God honors those prayers, friends.
But that's not the only way that He comforts John.
He gives evidence, but also He gives honor, the second subpoint here, by giving honor.
Jesus comforts those who doubt by giving honor in wherever seven.
As they went away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds concerning John.
What did you go out in the wilderness to see?
A reed shaken by the wind?
What then did you go out to see?
A man dressed in soft clothing?
Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in King's houses.
What then did you go out to see?
A prophet.
Yes, and I tell you.
Yes, I tell you and more than a prophet.
See Jesus, I want you to picture this in your mind, not the Jesus part.
So Westminster jokes, sorry.
So you have a crowd of people who are there listening to Jesus instruct you or instruct them and teach them.
And these people kind of push to the front to get where Jesus is, either followers of John the Baptist, and they ask him this question very publicly.
Hey, John's wondering if you're actually the guy or should we keep on looking?
So Jesus answers them.
Tell John what you've seen.
And then they go to do that.
They leave to go tell John.
And as they're walking away, certainly while they're still in earshot, Jesus addresses the crowd who has to be wondering who is there, some conflict between Jesus and John the Baptist now.
Is there some discontinuity in this message that's declared?
Some of you
might remember from your childhood.
Ooh, does mom disagree with that on this?
Yeah?
That's the type of thing that has to be going on there.
And Jesus turns to the crowd immediately and says, hey, you guys all went to see John the Baptist, right?
Why?
Why'd you go there?
Did you go there because there was a guy who was saying something on Monday and then a hot new take on Tuesday and a brand new fresh thing on Wednesday, changing back and forth as it fit the times, a reed blown around in the wind?
No, of course not.
That's not what prophets do.
Did you go out to see there a man who was dressed in really nice clothing?
Did you hear perhaps as someone who had means to give something to you or was a spectacle in some way?
No, of course not.
That's not what prophets are like.
He wore camel hair, eight locusts and honey.
The opposite of finery.
So Jesus says, so what'd you go to see?
What was it that drew you all the way out into the wilderness there in the desert?
Why did you take that long journey on foot?
What drew you out there?
Oh yeah, that's right.
He's a prophet of God.
And more than that, he's more than that.
He's more than a prophet, verse 10, this is he of whom it is written, behold, I send my messenger before your face who will prepare your way before you.
This is the prophet that other prophets prophesied about.
He's the foretold prophet.
Jesus is validating John's ministry.
Again, we should not be surprised that we see Christ advocating for the one who believes.
Brothers and sisters, this is what Christ does for you even now as he sits at the right hand of God, the Father, he intercedes for his elect even today.
So we should not be surprised when we see
Jesus speaking on behalf of someone who has faith, but struggles with doubts.
He continues talking about John, verse 11, truly I say to you, among those born of women, there has arisen no one greater than John the Baptist, that the one who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
No one before John the Baptist had as clear of a picture of who the Christ was as John the Baptist did.
No one else left in their mother's womb.
No one else baptized the Messiah.
No one else saw the Holy Spirit descend as a dove.
In fact, the religious leaders are the ones that John the Baptist is turned to and says, you vipers who warned you to flee from the wrath that is coming, the people who should have known.
No one had a clear picture than John the Baptist.
And yet Jesus says, the least in the kingdom of heaven, that is the least of any of us.
Those of us who have the full story of what God has done are greater than John the Baptist because we have the full story.
See, John the Baptist did not know that the Messiah would be crucified.
John the Baptist did not know that he would be buried in three days later, raised from the grave, did not know that he would ascend into heaven, that he would pour out his Holy Spirit at Pentecost.
John the Baptist couldn't have known those things.
But friends, you do.
And so because you have the greater revelation that God has given to us through His Word, through His Spirit, Jesus says, more blessed than John the Baptist is the least in the kingdom of heaven.
And then we get to verse 12.
I will read verse 12, I must confess,
Every single commentary that I have read on this says, this is the hardest verse, perhaps in all of Matthew.
So we'll talk about it briefly.
We will move on.
Verse 12 here, from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence.
And the violent take it by force.
If you happen to have an NLT or an NIV or an NASB,
these things will be translated a little differently.
All of these have a slight different translation.
Here's why.
When it says the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, that could mean one of two options, that the kingdom has actually suffered violence, which way the ESV translators take that, or that the kingdom has advanced violently.
It's the same thing with the second part.
And the violent take it by force, it could mean that violent people are seizing things or that through violence people are forcing their way into the kingdom or are being forced into the kingdom violently.
So both of these clauses can be taken either way.
My read on it for what it's worth.
I think Dr. Dan Doryani has the best interpretation of this in that he says, yes.
Both are true.
Yes, the kingdom of God is being attacked with violence, and now violence is actually propelling it forward in a way that is upsetting all of the world till then, in a violent reordering of things, not through bloodshed, but through action and movement, the kingdom of God is advancing.
And yes, violent people are forcing the kingdom of God ahead.
They are taking things by force,
but they are also those who were violent are being taken by the force of God.
So I think it's a both and situation, especially as we continue here.
He says verse 13, now, for all the prophets in the law prophesied and tell John.
And if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come.
He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
I think that verse 15 there is really the key to understanding that short passage there, that Jesus is speaking with a double meaning.
And I think this is what we see throughout all of church history, right?
The kingdom of God suffers violence and is propelled forward.
The violent men who seek to harm the kingdom of God are actually brought into God's kingdom through their own hatred of their Messiah.
I think of the Roman soldier
who saw the crucifixion of Christ and churned and said, surely this man was the son of God.
This is the way that God operates, friends.
Think of your own story, your own testimony.
Those of you in this room who believe, was it because you tried oh so very hard to convince yourself?
Or was it because you were convinced by God?
I would presume that it was the latter for most of us in here.
Or some of you never remember a day of your life where you've walked apart from the gospel.
What a blessing that is.
But that sure doesn't sound like something that lacks violence.
It sounds forceful.
Like you were brought into this thing.
Again, this seems to be the way that God works.
And Jesus continues to say that John is the Elijah who would come.
This is from Malachi, the Elijah who would come before the Messiah.
So Jesus gives John all of the honor.
It says, look, John is the guy that you went to go see.
That's who he was.
He really was that prophet.
And as John the Baptist's disciples are walking away, they hear this confirmation, and then Jesus turns on the crowd.
And he goes from comforting those who doubt, to now confronting those who demand verse 11.
Truly I say, sorry, verse 16, but to what shall I compare this generation?
It is like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling to their playmates.
We played the flute for you and you did not dance.
We sang a dirge and you did not mourn.
Almost every other time that Jesus talks about children in scripture, he does so in a positive light.
He tells the disciples, and I'll keep the children from coming to him.
He says that anyone who leads a child to sin and he better than a millstone was tied around their neck and they were thrown into a sea.
He says that you have to become like a child to receive him, but not these children.
These children are pouty, whiny, insistent, demanding cry babies.
You know the type.
You guys have all known kids like this.
The type of kid who is losing the game so they pick up their ball and take it with them because they can't lose if the game's over.
If you're really honest with yourself, you've all been kids like this.
And if we're really truly honest, we've all been adults like this.
My way or the highway.
Do what I say or get out.
The problem with this type of demanding, where it's different from doubt, is this demands control.
If I do this thing, then you must do this in return.
Friends, if this is how you have lived your life,
controlling different situations and scenarios, people wielding this in an attempt to control God, to get what you desire.
Friend, I plead with you.
Turn away from this.
Repent.
It is heinous.
It reminds me of a mentor and pastor that I once had who was convinced that God was leading him to leave this area and go plant a church, another
city in the Pacific Northwest.
And even though he was very good at his profession that he had outside of being a preacher and pastor, he couldn't find jobs anywhere in the large city that he was trying to move to.
Even though their house was beautiful and reasonably priced, no one wanted to buy their house.
And he became immediately apparent to everyone on the outside, God is not calling you.
to go plant a church there.
But he refused to listen to that.
In fact, he said, God, you called me to do this thing.
If I am not doing it, you must not be real.
And so it brings me no joy to recount this, but he walked away from the faith through sins of alcoholism and illicit websites
abandoned his wife and their children.
This is what happens when we demand and play that we are God friends.
We do not get to control reality.
We cannot demand these things.
This is what this generation he's talking to is like, and he gives a concrete example.
For John came, verse 18, neither eating nor drinking, and they say he has a demon.
The son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, look at him, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.
Yet wisdom is justified by her deeds.
John came not eating for a reason, and it was the wise decision to make.
Jesus came eating and drinking for a reason, and it was the wise decision to make.
That's how wisdom works.
It's justified by its deeds.
immediately readily apparent, which is the right thing to go.
It takes wisdom to make that decision.
That's what Jesus is talking about here.
And so what are the deeds that wisdom wrought in both of these people's lives?
In conclusion, when John the Baptist life, he prepared the way for Christ, the coming Messiah.
That's what he did.
Jesus just told us that.
And friends, you know the result of the wisdom, the deeds that Christ committed.
by drawing near to sinners, by approaching them, by eating with tax collectors, he showed that God welcomes those that the world despises.
In living the perfect life and moving towards the outcast, Christ became identified with the outcast as he is nailed to the cross as our sins are nailed there with him.
The beloved becomes the rejected.
The source of all life dies, but three days later takes his life back up, ascends into heaven where he sits now at the Father's right hand, interceding for us.
This is what the deeds of Christ accomplished.
is what all of Israel was waiting for.
And now we wait for His return.
Looking forward, remembering that our God is a God who keeps His promises.
Just as He did here, He will do eventually.
And so we remember that when we have doubts, we take them to Christ.
We run to Christ.
We check our demands.
We make sure that if we are someone who is struggling with taking control of these situations that we turn to God and ask Him to lead us to repentance, through a trust solely and entirely in Him.
May we be a people who run to Christ with our doubts and who flee from our demands.
Would you please pray with me?
Merciful and gracious Father in heaven, Lord, we thank You that You sent Your Son to come and be with us, to move towards us.
We thank You that You have sent Your Spirit to give us new life, that we could know You and believe in You.
And we thank You for Your Word, and it always communicates the gospel to us.
We pray all of these things in Jesus' name.
Amen.